# Exercise Set 14: FUNctors

*CSci 2041: Advanced Programming Principles, Spring 2019 (Hopper)*

**Due:** Monday, May 6 at 11:59pm

## 1. Legal/Not Legal
For each of the following programs, is it a legal OCaml program or not?  Explain your answer.

1. ```ocaml
   module type ArgSig = sig val arg : int end
   module A(X : ArgSig) = X
   ```

2. ```ocaml
   module type BS = sig end
   module BApp(BF : functor (B:BS) -> BS)(B : BS) = BF(B)
   let module BF(B : BS) = struct end in
   let module BB = BApp(BF)(struct let b = 1 end) in ()
   ```

3. ```ocaml
   module type Cs = sig val s : string end
   module CF(C : Cs) : Cs = struct let s = C.s ^ "c" end
   module c = CF(struct let s = "c" end)
   ```

4. ```ocaml
   module D = struct type t = float list end
   module DF(D) = struct type t = D.t end
   ```

5. ```ocaml
   module EF(E : sig type t = A of unit end) : sig type t = A of unit end = E
   ```

6. ```ocaml
   let module F(FX:sig type ft val ff : ft -> bool end) : sig type ft val ff : ft -> bool end = struct type ft = FX.ft let ff _ = true end in
   let module FF = F(struct type ft = unit let ff () = false end) in FF.ff
   ```
   
### Test cases

Record your answers in the file `legalfunctor.md` in a markdown list using the format
```
1. `module A`
>  Legal
>> The functor A creates a module by not adding any fields, and the declaration doesn't constrain its signature.
```
To get full credit, your solution must be correct for at least 5/6 of the programs.

## 2.  DefaultDict

In this section and Lab 13, we'll look at dictionaries, data structures that map from keys of type `k` to values of type `v`.  The lab has an associative list implementation of dictionaries, and as students, you implement(ed) a function dictionary.   In this exercise, we'll consider dictionaries that are parameterized in two addition aspects:

* the equality function that determines whether two keys are the same or not,

* the "default value" to return if a key is not present in the dictionary

The file `dict.ml` contains some starting pieces: a signature `Elt` that will provide the key type, value type, and equality function, and a signature `Dict` that our functors will satisfy.

### EqListDict

Let's start by filling in the `EqListDict` functor, which has "kind" `functor(Elt) -> Dict`, that is, the functor should take a module satisfying `Elt` and create a module satisfying `Dict`:

+ The empty value is just `[] : k*v list`
+ The add function just conses its key and value arguments onto the front of the list
+ The lookup function should walk through the list, using the Elt module's `eq` function to compare keys, and return the value associated to the first key matching its key argument.  If no matching key is found, EqListDict should raise `Not_found`.

In order to use the resulting `dict` module, you will need to expose the types `k` and `v` in the functor signature.

+ Some example evaluations:

    * `let module DII = EqListDict(struct type k = int type v = int let eq = (=) end) in let d1 = DII.empty in let d2 = DII.add 2 17 d1 in DII.lookup 2 d2` should evaluate to `17`

    * `let module DSLI = EqListDict(struct type k = string type v = int let eq s1 s2 = String.length s1 = String.length s2 end) in let d = DSLI.add "aa" 42 DSLI.empty in DSLI.lookup "bb" d` should evaluate to `42`.

    * `let module NeverDict = EqListDict(struct type k = int type v = int let eq k1 k2 = false end) in let d = NeverDict.add 1 1 NeverDict.empty in NeverDict.lookup 1 d` should raise `Not_found`

### DefaultDict

Now make the `DefaultElt` signature, which just includes the `Elt` signature plus requires a `default` value of type `v`.  Write a functor, `DefaultDict` that acts on a module of type `DefaultEt`, and implements the `Dict` signature with appropriate sharing.  `DefaultDict` will look nearly identical to `EqListDict` except that where `EqListDict` raises `NotFound`, the new functor should return the default value in the DefaultElt module it received as input. Some example evaluations:

  * `let module M = DefaultDict(struct type k = int type v = int let default = -1 let eq = (=) end) in M.lookup 1 M.empty` should evaluate to `-1`.

  * `let module M = DefaultDict(struct type k = int type v = string let default = "" let eq = (=) end) in M.lookup 2 (M.add 2 "a" M.empty)` should evaluate to `"a"`.

  * `let module M = DefaultDict(struct type k = int type v = string let default = "" let eq = (=) end) in M.lookup 3 (M.add 2 "a" M.empty)` should evaluate to `""`.

### DefaultDictFunctor
Finally, let's make a functor that converts an arbitrary `Dict` into a `DefaultDict`: `DefaultDictFunctor` should act on a `DefaultElt` module and a `Dict` module.  `DefaultDictFunctor(E)(D)` should include `D`, and overwrite the `lookup` function by calling `D.lookup` in a `try...catch` wrapper that returns `E.default` with `Not_found` is raised.  Example evaluations:

  * `let module E = struct type k = int type v = int let default = (-1) let eq = (=) end in
     let module D = EqListDict(E) in let module DD = DefaultDictFunctor(E)(D) in
     DD.lookup 1 DD.empty` should evaluate to `-1`.

  * `let module E = struct type k = int type v = int let default = (-1) let eq _ _ = false end in
    let module D = EqListDict(E) in let module DD = DefaultDictFunctor(E)(D) in
    DD.lookup 1 (DD.add 1 3 DD.empty)` should evaluate to `-1`.

  * `let module E = struct type k = string type v = string let default = "" let eq s1 s2 = String.lowercase_ascii s1 = String.lowercase_ascii s2 end in
      let module D = EqListDict(E) in let module DD = DefaultDictFunctor(E)(D) in
      DD.lookup "A" (DD.add "a" "yo" DD.empty)` should evaluate to `"yo"`.

### Test cases

There are three examples for each function.  To get full credit your solution should match at least 6/9 example evaluations.

## 3. FREE POINTS!

In your ex14 directory, create a file named `answers.md` and record your answers to the following three questions as a markdown list:

1. What was your favorite topic we covered this semester?
2. What was your least favorite homework, and how do you think it could be improved?
3. How often did you work on labs during lab time, and if lab sections were longer would you have used the extra time for lab work?

Then do a happy dance, you're done with CSci 2041 exercises!
