# Exercise Set 11: Threads and concurrent execution

*CSci 2041: Advanced Programming Principles, Spring 2019 (Hopper)*

**Due:** Monday, April 15 at 11:59pm

## 1.  Interleaved evaluation

Consider the following three threads operating on the shared state `(x,y)`, in
which a thread can `read` a variable from the global state - creating a new local 
copy of the variable, or `write` a new
value to the global state using its local values. Let's call the first operation of
thread 1 `t1.0`, the first of thread 2 `t2.0`, and so on, so the last operation
of thread 3 is `t3.1` and the last of thread 1 is `t1.3`.   

```
state = (x=1,y=10)
T1 = read(y) ; write(x,y) ; read(x) ; write (y,x+y)
T2 = write(y,1) ; read(x) ; write(y,x+100)
T3 = read(x); write(x,x*10)
```

Different interleavings of these threads can result in different shared states
at the end of the execution; for example, for threads 1 and 2, the interleaving
`t1.0,t1.1,t1.2,t1.3,t2.0,t2.1,t2.2` results in the state `(10,110)`:

- After t1.0, t1 has state (y=10)
- After t1.1, t1 has state (y=10) and the global state is (x=10,y=10)
- After t1.2, t1 has state (x=10,y=10)
- After t1.3, t1 has state (x=10,y=10) and the global state is (x=10,y=20)
- After t2.0, the global state is (x=10,y=1)
- After t2.1, t2 has state (x=10)
- After t2.2, t2 has state (x=1), and the global state is (x=10,y=110)

but the interleaving `t2.0,t2.1,t2.2,t1.0,t1.1,t1.2,t1.3` results in the state
`(101,202)`.  In the file `intereval.md`, record the state resulting from each of
the following interleavings:

1. `t3.0, t2.0, t2.1, t3.1, t2.2`

2. `t1.0, t1.1, t3.0, t3.1, t1.2, t1.3`

3. `t1.0, t1.1, t2.0, t3.0, t2.1, t3.1, t1.2, t1.3, t2.2`

4. `t2.0, t1.0, t1.1, t1.2, t1.3, t2.1, t2.2`

### Answer format and test cases

Your answers should appear in a markdown list, numbered 1-4, as a pair `(x,y)` (e.g. `(2,250)`)
There is one test case for each order, and you should pass 3/4 cases to get full credit for this problem.

## 2.  `Lwt` threads

In Wednesday's lecture, we introduced the lwt event-based threading library.  We'll be using this library for these exercises, lab 11, and homework 6.  You can find the official documentation [here](https://ocsigen.org/lwt/3.3.0/api/Lwt), an overview from the developers [here](https://ocsigen.org/lwt/3.3.0/manual/manual), and a short intro about lwt [here](lwt_intro.md).  In this problem, we'll use `lwt` threads to produce interleaved
transcripts similar to the examples in the previous question.  Let's work in the file `interleaved.ml`.

### thread2, thread3

`interleaved.ml` defines a procedure `thread1` that when evaluated will print the actions of thread 1 from question 1 to the screen.  (The random delays are to give a better chance that we will see different interleavings of threads later.)  Add functions `thread2 : unit -> unit Lwt.t` and `thread3 : unit -> unit Lwt.t` that follow the same procedure to print the actions of threads 2 and 3 from above.

Once defined, you can run these threads in parallel from utop using the `Lwt.join` function, e.g., `Lwt.join [thread1 () ; thread2 (); thread3 () ]`, or `Lwt.join [thread1 (); thread3 ()]`.  

### Abstraction!

By the time you finished `thread3`, you surely will have noticed a
high degree of repetition in the process of constructing these threads.  Add a function `dprint : string -> string -> unit Lwt.t` that takes a string to use as the the thread names (like `t1` or `t2` above), a string to use as the action (like `write(y,1)` or `read(x)` above), and sleeps for a short random duration before printing the thread name `.` action as in the previous functions.  

This function can cut down on typing, e.g. allowing us to define `thread1` alteratively as:

```
let thread1 () = dprint "t1" "read(y)" >>=
  fun () -> dprint "t1" "write(x,y)" >>=
  fun () -> dprint "t1" "read(x)" >>=
  fun () -> dprint "t1" "write"
```

But we can do even better: the `Lwt_list` module has an `lwt` version of several common list higher-order functions, in both *parallel* (`_p`) and *serial* (`_s`) versions.  Using `Lwt_list.iter_s`, we can define a function `make_t : string -> string list -> unit Lwt.t`, so that e.g. `make_t "t1" ["read(y)"; "write(x,y)"; "read(x)"; "write(y,x+y)"]` behaves the same as `thread1`.

### Test cases

One each for the four functions defined above; to get full credit for this section, you should complete at least 3/4 definitions given above.

## 3.  Mutexes and philosophers

In the classic "dining philosophers" problem, 12 philosophers are seated at a table with 12 chopsticks.  Each philosopher takes the left-hand chopstick and then tries to grab the one on their right.  Since no hungry philosopher would put down one chopstick before having eaten, the philosophers wind up in a *deadlock* situation: no philosopher can proceed until the philosopher to their right puts down a chopstick, but no philosopher will put down their unused chopstick.  

A _mutex_ is a mechanism similar to the philosophers' chopsticks:  

+ In `lwt`, it is created by calling `Lwt_mutex.create ()` (`lwt` mutexes have type `Lwt_mutex.t`)

+ A thread can _lock_ or acquire mutex `m` by calling `Lwt_mutex.lock m`.  If no other thread has locked `m`, the thread can proceed; othewise the calling thread will have to wait until `m` is unlocked. If more than one thread tries to `lock` the same mutex while it is already locked, only one thread will acquire the lock when it is released. (The others will continue to wait)

+ A thread can _unlock_  or release `m` by calling `Lwt_mutex.unlock m` (if it holds the lock on `m`)

+ A thread can also test whether `m` is currently locked by calling `Lwt_mutex.is_locked m`.  However, there is no guarantee that if this call returns `false`, a subsequent attempt to lock `m` will succeed (because another thread could acquire the lock in the meantime), so indiscriminate use of `is_locked` could lead to *race conditions* in which multiple threads "race" to acquire a lock.  

Let's use this similarity to simulate the dining philosophers in the file `philosophers.ml`.  

### `philosopher`

Add a function, `philosopher : string -> Lwt_mutex.t -> Lwt_mutex.t -> unit Lwt.t` so that `philosopher s` will simulate a philosopher named `s` that wants to dine.  When the thread tries to "eat", it should pause for a random delay, lock its first mutex (the "left chopstick"), print that it has acquired this lock, pause for a random delay, lock the second mutex, print that it has acquired this mutex (the "right chopstick") and will "eat," pause for a random delay, then announce that it has finished and release both mutexes.
So for example, calling `philosopher "Socrates" (Lwt_mutex.create ()) (Lwt_mutex.create())` should result in the printed output:

```
Socrates got left chopstick!
Socrates got right chopstick, eating!
Socrates all done eating!                                    
```

Now if we try simulating a pair of dining philosophers:

```
let (m1,m2) = (Lwt_mutex.create (), Lwt_mutex.create ()) in
 let t1 = (philosopher "Socrates" m1 m2) in
 let t2 = (philosopher "Plato" m2 m1) in Lwt_main.run (t1 <&> t2)
```

We will most likely see a deadlock:

```
Socrates got left chopstick!
Plato got left chopstick!
```

Tests for this section : `philosopher` has the correct type, and produces the correct output on zero, one, or two locked mutexes.

### `polite_phil`

Now add a second, "cooperative" thread function `polite_phil : string -> Lwt_mutex.t -> Lwt_mutex.t -> unit Lwt.t` that simulates a "polite" philosopher, which acts the same as above, except that before trying to lock the "right" mutex, it checks whether the mutex is locked; if the check returns true, the polite philosopher announces that they can wait, unlocks the first mutex, pauses for a random delay, and tries again.  So if a polite philosopher dines with an ordinary philosopher:
```
let (m1,m2) = (Lwt_mutex.create (), Lwt_mutex.create ()) in
 let t1 = (philosopher "Sidgwick" m1 m2) in
 let t2 = (polite_phil "Kant" m2 m1) in Lwt_main.run (t1 <&> t2)
```
We will see:
```
Sidgwick got left chopstick!
Kant got left chopstick!
Kant can wait (sigh)...
Sidgwick got right chopstick, eating!
Sidgwick all done eating!
Kant got left chopstick!
Kant got right chopstick, eating!
Kant all done eating!
```

Tests for this section: same as above.

### Test cases

There are 8 total test cases, and to get full credit for this section your solution should pass at least 6/8.
